# SPADE
Stock assessment using PArtial Differential Equations

This project grew out of a bunch of things, but a proximate catalyst was You-Gan pointing out to me the flaw in the growth transition matrix approach of your typical size-age structured model. Basically, once you admit individual variation in growth, a memory-less probabilistic transition matrix makes no sense. Growth at the individual level is still deterministic, and trying to deal with faster and slower growers across the population probabilistically is incoherent. Think of it from the perspective of an individual fish. At time step i you are a years old and x centimetres long, and you are sitting in the appropriate length-age 'bin'. At the end of the time step the growth transition matrix picks you up and dumps you, randomly, in another size bin. It is not completely random of course - it is in accordance with a density with expectation equal to the expected growth increment for a fish of size x, but there is still a probabilistic aspect to it. This means you can be a 'fast grower' at time step i, and a 'slow grower' at time step i+1. There is no persistent biological consistency. This becomes a problem when size-selective fishing mortality kicks in. In reality the fast growers are being caught younger, and skewing the size-at-age distribution of the remaining population. But the model has no way to understand this, as it doesn't actually distinguish fast growers and slow growers in a coherent way, and keeps randomly generating fast growers. So this leads to bias. A well understood correction for this is to move to the growth type groups approach of Walters, but it got me thinking about what the fundamental issue is, which ended up connecting to a bunch of other things.
